README.md, before:

giferly - a GIF 89a decoder
===========================

by Avik Das

Overview
--------

giferly is a standalone graphical program that decodes a GIF file in pure
Erlang, then displays the image using the Simple DirectMedia Layer (SDL).

![](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/avik-das/giferly/master/screenshot-stripes.png)
![](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/avik-das/giferly/master/screenshot-tomatos.png)

Rationale
---------

This is my attempt to learn both the GIF 89a format and Erlang. The project
started by my encountering an article describing the GIF format, in essence as
a summary of some of the more fundamental parts of the official specification
of the format. While this task would have been fairly straightforward in Ruby,
C or some other language I am familiar with, I decided to implement the decoder
in Erlang in order to learn the language.

The entire parser is implemented from scratch in Erlang. While Erlang may not
necessarily be the ideal choice for this task, it is an interesting exercise to
attempt this in a functional style, and taking advantage of Erlang's binary
data manipulation features.

Quick Start
-----------

```sh
# Install the necessary dependencies (example given for Ubuntu)
sudo apt install erlang erlang-esdl-dev

# build the application
make

# run the application with the demo input file
make run

# run the application with a different input file
# note that there are many bugs, so many files won't work
make run IN=gfx/rgb-stripes.gif

# run the tests
make test
```

User Interaction
----------------

Pressing '`=`' (that is, '`+`' without pressing the Shift key) zooms into the
image, while pressing '`-`' zooms out. You cannot zoom out past 100%, and a
maximum zoom level is also set.

Pressing '`n`' or `SPACE` will move to the next frame of the animation if
relevant. Not all animation-related functionality is supported yet, so the
animation may have visual bugs, such as not clearing the image before moving to
the next frame.

Pressing '`q`' or `ESC` will quit the application.

Dependencies
------------

<dl>
  <dt><a href="http://www.erlang.org/download.html">Erlang</a></dt>
  <dd>In particular, the compiler and virtual machine are needed to build and run this application. As I am using Ubuntu 11.04 in developing this application, I have developed against Erlang R13B03, and as such have avoided any features available only in later releases. I have since tested on Ubuntu 18.04, Erlang/OTP 20.</dd>

  <dt><a href="http://esdl.sourceforge.net/">Esdl (Erlang SDL bindings)</a></dt>
  <dd>Used to render the decoded GIF onto the screen.</dd>
</dl>

Current Status
--------------

There are many bugs remaining in the application. Given that I created this
application to understand the GIF 89a format and learn some Erlang, I feel that
I've accomplished my goal. Thus, I *may* incrementally add a feature or fix a
bug in the future, but please feel free to fork this project and update it.

Some of the problems include:

* Incomplete ability to decode GIF files. I've tested with multiple input
  images, but real-world images often contain data, such as additional
  extension blocks, that reveal bugs in the decoder.

* Untested features: local color table support, whether an animated gif can
  even be parsed.

* No support for interlacing.

Additionally:

* Inability to decode GIF 87a files. This is by design.

* Inability to display animations. Again, this is by design, so far.
  Technically, the frames of an animation *should* be navigable by using the
  '`n`' or `SPACE` key, but this feature is untested.

References
----------

<dl>
  <dt><a href="http://matthewflickinger.com/lab/whatsinagif/bits_and_bytes.asp">What's In A GIF</a></dt>
  <dd>the article that piqued my interest. Provides a very comprehensive, but approachable, guide to the GIF 89a format.</dd>

  <dt><a href="http://www.w3.org/Graphics/GIF/spec-gif89a.txt">Graphics Interchange Format Version 89a</a></dt>
  <dd>The official specification, dated 31 July 1990.</dd>

  <dt><a href="http://learnyousomeerlang.com/">Learn You Some Erlang For Great Good!</a></dt>
  <dd>The book I'm using to learn Erlang.</dd>
</dl>

Commit message:

Correctly parse main blocks
Previously, I had incorrectly assumed the file structure to be:

1. A set of constant blocks, like the header and the logical screen
   descriptor.

2. All the extension blocks, including a single graphics control
   extension.

3. Individual images.

But actually, the structure is:

1. Constant blocks.

2. Extension _OR_ image blocks. Furthermore, if a graphics control
   extension block affects an image, the image follows the extension
   immediately. Thus, there can be multiple graphics control extension
   blocks, up to one per image.

   An image can also appear in this section without a graphics control
   extension block preceding it.

In restructuring the code to fix these issues, I also discovered I was
building up the list of images in reverse order. That issue has also
been fixed.

With these fixes, I have been successfully able to parse all the GIF
files I've thrown at the decoder. I'm also able to play animations, so I
updated the README to reflect the new current status.

README.md, after:

giferly - a GIF 89a decoder
===========================

by Avik Das

Overview
--------

giferly is a standalone graphical program that decodes a GIF file in pure
Erlang, then displays the image using the Simple DirectMedia Layer (SDL).

![](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/avik-das/giferly/master/screenshot-stripes.png)
![](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/avik-das/giferly/master/screenshot-tomatos.png)

Rationale
---------

This is my attempt to learn both the GIF 89a format and Erlang. The project
started by my encountering an article describing the GIF format, in essence as
a summary of some of the more fundamental parts of the official specification
of the format. While this task would have been fairly straightforward in Ruby,
C or some other language I am familiar with, I decided to implement the decoder
in Erlang in order to learn the language.

The entire parser is implemented from scratch in Erlang. While Erlang may not
necessarily be the ideal choice for this task, it is an interesting exercise to
attempt this in a functional style, and taking advantage of Erlang's binary
data manipulation features.

Quick Start
-----------

```sh
# Install the necessary dependencies (example given for Ubuntu)
sudo apt install erlang erlang-esdl-dev

# Build the application
make

# Run the application with the demo input file
make run

# Run the application with a different input file. While many files have been
# tested, it's likely some file will expose a bug in the program.
make run IN=gfx/rgb-stripes.gif

# run the tests
make test
```

User Interaction
----------------

Pressing '`=`' (that is, '`+`' without pressing the Shift key) zooms into the
image, while pressing '`-`' zooms out. You cannot zoom out past 100%, and a
maximum zoom level is also set.

Pressing '`n`' or `SPACE` will move to the next frame of the animation if
relevant. Not all animation-related functionality is supported yet, so the
animation may have visual bugs, such as not clearing the image before moving to
the next frame.

Pressing '`q`' or `ESC` will quit the application.

Dependencies
------------

<dl>
  <dt><a href="http://www.erlang.org/download.html">Erlang</a></dt>
  <dd>In particular, the compiler and virtual machine are needed to build and run this application. As I am using Ubuntu 11.04 in developing this application, I have developed against Erlang R13B03, and as such have avoided any features available only in later releases. I have since tested on Ubuntu 18.04, Erlang/OTP 20.</dd>

  <dt><a href="http://esdl.sourceforge.net/">Esdl (Erlang SDL bindings)</a></dt>
  <dd>Used to render the decoded GIF onto the screen.</dd>
</dl>

Current Status
--------------

Given that I created this application to understand the GIF 89a format and
learn some Erlang, I feel that I've accomplished my goal. Thus, I *may*
incrementally add a feature or fix a bug in the future, but please feel free to
fork this project and update it.

Some of the problems include:

* Inability to automatically play animations. This is by design, so far. The
  frames of an animation are navigable by using the '`n`' or `SPACE` key.

* No support for advanced animation functionality: disposal methods,
  inter-frame delays, and looping. The latter two fall under the inability to
  automatically play animations.

* No support for interlacing.

* Inability to decode GIF 87a files. This is by design.

References
----------

<dl>
  <dt><a href="http://matthewflickinger.com/lab/whatsinagif/bits_and_bytes.asp">What's In A GIF</a></dt>
  <dd>the article that piqued my interest. Provides a very comprehensive, but approachable, guide to the GIF 89a format.</dd>

  <dt><a href="http://www.w3.org/Graphics/GIF/spec-gif89a.txt">Graphics Interchange Format Version 89a</a></dt>
  <dd>The official specification, dated 31 July 1990.</dd>

  <dt><a href="http://learnyousomeerlang.com/">Learn You Some Erlang For Great Good!</a></dt>
  <dd>The book I'm using to learn Erlang.</dd>
</dl>
